GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill. JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff. On the
"NewsHour" tonight: A new
political divide? How Republican
leaders are distancing
themselves from the party's
front-runner. GWEN IFILL: Also
ahead this Wednesday: As racial
tensions on college campuses
remain high, affirmative action
is once again before the Supreme
Court. JUDY WOODRUFF: And we
hear we shouldn't trust them,
but how accurate are political
polls and what should we read
into them? BILL MCINTURFF,
Partner and Co-Founder, Public
Opinion Strategies: I don't
think Peter and I, or any
pollster, would tell you that a
poll today has much or any
predictive power for what
October of 2016 will look like.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK) JUDY WOODRUFF: The FBI
now says the shooters who killed
14 people in San Bernardino,
California, had talked of
violence as far back as 2013.
That's a year before they were
married. At a Senate hearing
today, FBI Director James Comey
said investigators are piecing
together a timeline on Syed
Farook and Tashfeen Malik. JAMES
COMEY, FBI Director: They were
actually radicalized before they
started courting or dating each
other online. As early as the
end of 2013, they were talking
to each other about jihad and
martyrdom, before they became
engaged and then married and
lived together in the United
States. JUDY WOODRUFF: It's also
reported that Syed Farook may
have plotted an attack in 2012
with a neighbor who bought the
assault rifles used last week.
The neighbor has checked himself
into a mental clinic. GWEN
IFILL: The man accused of
attacking a Planned Parenthood
clinic in Colorado blurted out
today that he's guilty. Robert
Lewis Dear repeatedly voiced
anti-abortion sentiments during
a hearing. At one point, he
shouted: "I'm guilty. I'm a
warrior for the babies." Three
people died in the shootings
last month. Meanwhile, a
Baltimore policeman accused in
the Freddie Gray case testified
in his own defense today against
a manslaughter charge. Gray was
fatally injured during a ride in
a police van last April in an
incident that touched off
violent protests. Officer
William Porter told the court he
checked on Gray several times
and saw no sign of injury. And
he said: "I didn't call for a
medic because Gray was unable to
give me a reason for a medical
emergency." JUDY WOODRUFF:
Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel has
apologized for the shooting
death of 17-year-old Laquan
McDonald at the hands of police,
saying he takes responsibility
because it happened -- quote --
"on his watch." Video of the
2014 incident came out last
week, and now a white officer is
charged with murder. Emanuel
told the Chicago City Council
today that the police department
must undertake complete and
total reform. RAHM EMANUEL (D),
Mayor of Chicago: No officer
should be allowed to behave as
if they are above the law just
because they are responsible for
upholding the law. Permitting
and protecting even the smallest
acts of abuse by a tiny fraction
of our officers leads to a
culture where extreme acts of
abuse are more likely. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Hundreds of protesters
flooded downtown streets in
Chicago today, accusing Emanuel
of a cover-up. They blocked
traffic and demanded that the
mayor step down. GWEN IFILL: The
U.S. military is poised to do
more to help Iraq recapture a
key city from Islamic State
control. Iraqi government forces
have now encircled Ramadi, the
capital of Anbar province, and
are slowly moving in. Defense
Secretary Ash Carter told a
Senate panel today that the U.S.
stands ready to help finish the
job. ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: The United States is
prepared to assist the Iraqi
army with additional unique
capabilities to help them finish
the job, including attack
helicopters and accompanying
advisers, if circumstances
dictate and if requested by
Prime Minister Abadi. GWEN
IFILL: Later, the White House
said President Obama has not yet
approved the use of U.S. attack
helicopters in Iraq. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, in Syria,
the last of the rebel stronghold
of Homs has officially fallen to
government troops. Rebel
factions pulled out today, under
a local truce. Scores of people,
including gunmen and civilians,
left the city in bus convoys
organized by the United Nations
and Red Crescent. The city had
been under siege by the Syrian
military for three years. GWEN
IFILL: Afghanistan's military
struggled today to beat back a
Taliban attack on an air base in
the south. A gun battle raged
into the night outside the city
of Kandahar, killing and
wounding dozens of people.
Jonathan Miller of Independent
Television News filed this
report. JONATHAN MILLER: We now
know that at least 37 civilians
and Afghan soldiers were killed
and 35 wounded when Taliban
insurgents stormed the heavily
fortified complex, taking up
position in a residential
section, home to hundreds of
NATO and other international
personnel. This morning, this
airport employee said the
security forces weren't letting
anyone onto the base yet, as the
fighting was still raging. The
Taliban released this video of
what they claimed were the
insurgents who attacked the
Kandahar base. Their leader,
speaking in English, warned
President Obama to get remaining
U.S. troops out of Afghanistan.
MAN: This my suggestion, Barack
Obama. Obama, you are not safe
in Afghanistan. JONATHAN MILLER:
He threatened to kill foreign
soldiers of what the Talibs call
the Afghan slave army. This
photograph shows the same men,
same backdrop, this time dressed
in Afghan army uniform and
wielding Kalashnikovs. The
identity of one of the 10 is
obscured. It's possible that he
didn't join the operation.
Afghan forces claim to have
killed 14 insurgents. Gruesome
pictures released tonight show
Afghan soldiers displaying the
dead bodies of the attackers and
their weapons to TV cameras.
GWEN IFILL: Afghanistan's
President Ashraf Ghani was in
Pakistan today, discussing
possible peace talks with the
Taliban. JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in
this country, a sweeping
makeover of public education law
cleared Congress today. The
Senate gave final approval to
the rewrite of the No Child Left
Behind law. It shifts more
decision-making to the States on
how to assess teachers and
schools, but it still requires
annual testing in reading and
math. GWEN IFILL: Another night
of heavy rain has spread
flooding across more of the
Pacific Northwest. Storms in
Oregon and Washington state
knocked out power to nearly
100,000 customers. In Portland,
a tree crashed into a home,
killing a 60-year-old woman. And
just south of Seattle, cars and
trucks struggled to make their
way through high water that
closed a number of roads. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Volkswagen now says
that one of its emissions
scandals may not be as bad as
first believed. Company
officials initially said they
might have low-balled carbon
dioxide emissions in 800,000
vehicles. Now they say it's more
like 36,000. V.W. still faces a
much larger scandal over
cheating on U.S. emissions
tests. GWEN IFILL: On Wall
Street today, the Dow Jones
industrial average lost 75
points to close back near 17490.
The Nasdaq also fell 75, and the
S&P 500 dropped 16. JUDY
WOODRUFF: And it was 150 years
ago this month that the 13th
Amendment was ratified and
slavery was abolished in the
United States. President Obama
marked the occasion at the U.S.
Capitol, and he appeared to
target Donald Trump's call to
bar Muslims from entering the
country. BARACK OBAMA, President
of the United States: We betray
the efforts of the past if we
fail to push back against
bigotry in all its forms. Our
freedom is bound up with the
freedom of others, regardless of
what they look like, or where
they come from, or what their
last name is, or what faith they
practice. (CHEERING AND
APPLAUSE) JUDY WOODRUFF: That
drew a standing ovation from the
gathered congressional leaders.
But the White House said the
remarks were not specifically
directed at Trump. We will focus
on how Republicans are reacting
to Trump in just a moment. GWEN
IFILL: Also ahead on the
"NewsHour": race in college
admissions back at the Supreme
Court; exactly how accurate are
election polls; and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to the
divisions and dilemmas inside
the Republican Party. There's
growing GOP opposition to Donald
Trump, the front-runner in the
race for the White House,
especially since his latest
comments on denying Muslims
entry into this country. What do
these divisions mean for
Republicans and their leaders?
We explore that with former
Minnesota Congressman Vin Weber.
For the record, he's formally
endorsed Jeb Bush. And Jonathan
Martin, national political
correspondent for The New York
Times. And welcome to both of
you. VIN WEBER, Former U.S.
Congressman: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Jonathan, let
me start with you. You were in
South Carolina on Monday night,
when Donald Trump made those
comments about Muslims. First of
all, remind us, what was the
reaction in the room where he
spoke, and then what's been the
reaction since then? JONATHAN
MARTIN, National Political
Correspondent, The New York
Times: Quite enthusiastic from
his supporters, a lot of
applause, a sort of prolonged
ovation, many folks standing up,
some yells. There was approval.
I talked to many of them
afterwards, too, and I think it
was easy to find people in that
crowd that supported Mr. Trump's
plan. If you dig a little bit
deeper, though, you can find
some people that I think want to
see the border tightened and
want to see immigration
tightened, want to see more
vetting towards those coming
into the country, but are a
little bit leery about going as
far as Trump plans. So I don't
think it's as sort of cut and
dried as perhaps the crowd
reaction may have been in real
time. But, obviously, in the
days since then, there is deep
concern in the party about the
implications of this, barring an
entire faith of folks coming
into the country, and the
concern is not just the fact
that it's Trump saying these
bombastic things. It's the
fallout that could hurt the
party on down-ballot next year,
too, Judy. JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
Vin Weber, we have pointed out
you have endorsed Jeb Bush. But
you also... VIN WEBER: A long
time ago. JUDY WOODRUFF: A long
time ago. But you talk to
Republicans about the country.
What are picking up? VIN WEBER:
I don't know of a single
Republican leader that is not
appalled at what Donald Trump is
saying, and I don't know of a
single Republican strategist
that doesn't think he poses a
huge threat to the Republican
Party, increasingly so, whether
he wins or loses. And that's a
great, great concern. At the
grassroots level, you know, it's
a mixed bag, as Jonathan points
out. I think Trump is a classic
demagogue, and the demagogue
succeeds by preying on the
fears, legitimate fears
sometimes, that people have, and
they respond. JUDY WOODRUFF:
What is it that the opposition
is born out of? Is it just -- is
it this comment about Muslims?
Because there have been so many
other comments he has made that
have been controversial. What's
generating this? VIN WEBER: You
reach a tipping point, I think.
I think you had his comments
about Mexican Americans. You had
his comments about disabled
people. You had his comments
about McCain, which can be
extrapolated to veteran. And now
you have the comments about
Muslim Americans. And this is
kind of the one that went over
the edge and convinced people
this is a real serious threat to
brand the Republican Party as a
party of bigotry and
intolerance. And, again, I want
to emphasize, no Republican
leader that I am aware of shares
any of these views. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Jonathan Martin,
you're, again, obviously,
talking to Republicans. JONATHAN
MARTIN: Yes. JUDY WOODRUFF:
What's the genesis? What's
behind this concern? Is that
they're concerned he's going to
win the nomination? JONATHAN
MARTIN: Yes. JUDY WOODRUFF: Is
it concern that he will leave
the party and go run as an
independent? I mean, what is...
JONATHAN MARTIN: I think it's
both of those factors, and a
third one. It's that, nominee or
not, as Vin said, the fallout
from this is going to have an
impact on the Republican Party,
because these comments are going
to be linked to candidates next
year. Look, I think, for months,
there was frankly widespread
denial in the Republican Party
that Trump could be the nominee
or that Trump was formidable. It
was the summer of Trump. Folks
said, oh, this will be a passing
fancy. Well, here it is, we're
coming up on Christmas, and he
is still overwhelmingly the
front-runner for his party's
nomination. And I think you
finally see people in the party
coming to terms with that, right
when he sort of ups the rhetoric
level to new heights. And that's
the concern. JUDY WOODRUFF: But
is it more -- excuse me -- is it
more that they think they're
worried that he will go on to
win the election and become
president and will impose his
ideas, or is it they're worried
that he would lose to the
Democrats? JONATHAN MARTIN: Oh,
it's the latter. It's not that
he's going to be president. It's
that he could either be the
nominee and cause a landslide
wipeout for the party, where he
would lose... VIN WEBER: Or lose
the nomination and split the
party. JONATHAN MARTIN: Right.
Or go to the convention next
summer and offer some kind of
demands or give more speeches
that hurt the party. There's a
lot of scenarios, none of them
very good for the GOP. VIN
WEBER: And all of this, by the
way, coming from somebody whose
Republican credentials are very
thin. Everybody else running for
the Republican nomination has
some right to say they are more
or less lifelong Republicans.
Donald Trump has kind of picked
this party as his vehicle. He's
really not a Republican.
JONATHAN MARTIN: But what's
stunning, Judy, is that nobody
is hitting him on that or
anything else about his
comments, his background in
business, his previous political
stances. He is untouched. JUDY
WOODRUFF: You mean on the other
parts of his resume. Is that
what you mean? (CROSSTALK)
JONATHAN MARTIN: Well, exactly.
(CROSSTALK) VIN WEBER: Jonathan,
let me -- we have got to give
credit where credit is due. I
will say one very positive
thing. Paul Ryan did a really
good thing for our party today.
He didn't have to speak on this
subject. He said that he didn't
have to speak on it. He chose to
speak on it, and he spoke very
well. (CROSSTALK) JUDY WOODRUFF:
Yesterday. You mean about the
Muslim... (CROSSTALK) VIN WEBER:
Yesterday, about the Muslim
comments. JONATHAN MARTIN: But
I'm talking about a sustained
effort to go after Donald Trump
on TV in places like Iowa and
New Hampshire. Look, in 2003,
Democrats were concerned about
Howard Dean losing to George
Bush. VIN WEBER: Right. JONATHAN
MARTIN: And they went after him
in a very aggressive way. This
is comparable to that, but I
think the threat that Trump
poses is much more serious than
Dean. And where's the money? VIN
WEBER: But the Democrats had one
clear alternative, John Kerry,
who ultimately got the
nomination. Part of our problem
on the Republican side is, there
is not one clear alternative to
get behind. I'm for Bush, but I
can't say he's the only
alternative. JUDY WOODRUFF: What
about the fact that these
crowds, as Jonathan just
described, that Trump is
drawing, they appear to agree
with what -- and there was a new
poll out today that Bloomberg
News -- that was reported on
that indicates there's a large
percentage of voters who agree,
Republican voters who agree with
what Donald Trump is saying
about Muslims? How is the party
dealing with that? VIN WEBER:
That's very troublesome, beyond
troublesome. I have to say that
it -- you know what? The only
way that you can beat a
demagogue, which is what he is,
is to have a strong message of
leadership from someone else,
whether the someone else is a
Republican alternative or the
president of the United States.
And so far, those voters are not
hearing a strong enough message,
strong enough, responsible
message to sort of overshadow
the strong demagogic message
coming out of Donald Trump.
JONATHAN MARTIN: And I think,
also, those numbers, Judy,
explain some of the reluctance
among the other candidates to go
after him that hard. It's a hard
reality for the party to
swallow, but... JUDY WOODRUFF:
Some have, and some have been
less vigorous. JONATHAN MARTIN:
Yes. But it's a hard reality for
the party to swallow. A lot of
their grassroots voters in fact
support these kind of ideas. VIN
WEBER: They do. JUDY WOODRUFF:
And we will leave it there,
continue to watch it. Jonathan
Martin, Vin Weber, thank you.
(CROSSTALK) VIN WEBER: It's
interesting, if not positive.
GWEN IFILL: The Supreme Court
returned today to the hotly
debated, recurring dispute over
race in college admissions. The
question whether affirmative
action is constitutional has
played out before the nation's
high court before. For the
second time in three years, the
justices are considering whether
it is constitutional for
universities to consider race in
admissions. The lawsuit, then
and now, was brought by Abigail
Fisher, a white student from
Texas who was denied admission
to the University of Texas at
Austin in 2008. ABIGAIL FISHER,
Plaintiff: Like most Americans,
I don't believe that students
should be treated differently
based on their race. Hopefully,
this race -- this case will end
racial classifications and
preferences in admissions at the
University of Texas. GWEN IFILL:
Fisher's case reached the high
court the first time in 2012.
Justices sent it back to the
lower court for further review.
She went on to graduate from
Louisiana State University, but
she never dropped her challenge
to U.T.'s policy, which admits
every Texan who ranks in the top
10 percent of their class. For
the rest of the class, about 25
percent, race can be taken into
account. University of Texas
President Gregory Fenves:
,FMD-BO,OØGREG FENVES, President,
University of Texas: This
morning, we argued before the
Supreme Court that universities
have a compelling interest in
the educational benefits of
diversity and that our use of
race and ethnicity in the U.T.'s
holistic admissions process is
narrow, is constitutional, and
is in the best interest of our
state and the nation. GWEN
IFILL: The lower court ruled in
favor of the university again
last year, prompting the Supreme
Court to take the case up again.
The court has weighed in on
affirmative action before. In
2003, it decided 5-4 to allow
the University of Michigan Law
School to use race as one factor
in its admissions process. But
eight states have now banned the
use of race altogether as a
factor in admissions. Eight,
instead of nine, justices will
decide this case. Elena Kagan,
who defended affirmative action
as President Obama's solicitor
general, has recused herself and
will not participate. We're
joined now by two people of
opposing views who listened to
the arguments at the court
today. Janai Nelson, associate
director counsel of the NAACP
Legal Defense Fund, and Richard
Kahlenberg, senior fellow at the
Century Foundation. Welcome to
you both. RICHARD KAHLENBERG,
The Century Foundation: Thank
you. JANAI NELSON, NAACP Legal
Defense Fund: Thank you. GWEN
IFILL: You were both in the
court today. Presumably, you
have been following this case
very closely for some time. What
was different today than we saw
last time? RICHARD KAHLENBERG:
Well, I think there's a lot of
similarity to what we saw last
time. I think University of
Texas is in deep trouble with
its defense of the racial
preference programs. There's
broad agreement in the court
that diversity is a valuable
thing. That's certainly
something I believe in, but
there's a big disagreement on
how to get there. Should we use
race explicitly in our
admissions policies, or should
we do alternatives, such as
giving a leg up to economically
disadvantaged students? And,
today, you heard Justice Alito,
in particular, I thought was
quite powerful in arguing that
the alternatives are a better
way of getting racial diversity.
Texas is in this awkward
position because the top 10
percent plan did produce a lot
of racial and ethnic diversity.
So they're in this awkward
position of having to argue,
well, there's something wrong
with the top 10 percent
admitees. And so we want to get
upper-middle-class students of
color who will be more likely to
be leaders. And Alito went very
hard at that, saying the top 10
percent students are ones who --
a lot of them went to segregated
high schools. They overcame
odds. They ought to be our
leaders. GWEN IFILL: Richard
Kahlenberg just said that this
-- everybody basically agrees
that diversity is a good thing.
Yet I noticed something that
Justice Roberts, the chief
justice, said today. He said,
what unique perspective does a
minority student bring to a
physics class? Do you see that
there's general agreement that
diversity, in and of itself, is
a good thing? JANAI NELSON:
Well, I have to say that what
was very heartening about the
arguments today and the
justices' receptivity of them
was that not only is diversity
something that universities
should seek to achieve, but also
there was a recognition that the
court has held now four times
that you can use race in
admissions, that you can use it
so long as it's constitutionally
permissible, so long as you do
it in a narrow way, and it
fulfills a compelling
governmental interest. The
comment that Chief Justice
Roberts made really reflects
perhaps some individual or
personal lack of understanding
about the contributions that
diversity makes to the
university setting. But I think
we can all agree that the
Supreme Court has already spoken
on this in a 5-4 decision, so we
know that there are justices who
may not agree with this. But we
know that it is the law of the
land that you can use race in
admissions and that diversity is
a compelling governmental
interest. GWEN IFILL: Let me
read to you both -- and we will
put it up on the screen too --
one another thing that one of
the justices said. And that's
Justice Antonin Scalia, who said
from the bench: "There are those
who contend that it does not
benefit African-Americans to get
them into the University of
Texas, where they do not do
well, as opposed to having them
go to a less-advanced school, a
slower-track school, where they
do well." And then he went on to
say -- well, let -- didn't go on
to say -- we're going to move --
OK. "One of the briefs pointed
out that most of the black
scientists in this country don't
come from schools like the
University of Texas. They come
from lesser schools where they
do not feel that they're being
pushed ahead in classes that are
too fast for them." Mr.
Kahlenberg, what did Justice
Scalia mean by that? RICHARD
KAHLENBERG: Well, I personally
don't think he helped his cause
in suggesting that the classes
are too hard for
African-Americans, playing into
those stereotypes. I think the
bigger issue, though, is what
kind of diversity are we going
to have on campus? Right now, we
do a good job of bringing in
upper-middle-class students of
all colors, right? We have got
86 percent of African-American
students today at the selective
colleges are middle or upper
class. And the white students
are even wealthier. So we're
bringing in racial diversity,
but we're not going further to
socioeconomic diversity. And it
seems to me that's where --
Justice Scalia aside, Justice
Kennedy is the key here in this
case. GWEN IFILL: Yes. RICHARD
KAHLENBERG: He's the deciding
vote. And he has been pushing
universities to say, we want you
to get diversity, but try it in
other ways. And I think he's
likely to pave the way in the
ultimate decision for a more
robust affirmative action that
addresses our big economic
divide, as well as our racial
issues. GWEN IFILL: Justice
Kennedy always seems to be the
hinge point in all of these
debates. But I guess one of the
reasons I was curious about what
Justice Scalia said, Janai
Nelson, is because there's been
a -- one thing that has changed
since last time is there's this
matchup of all these college
protests, in which people feel
that maybe they don't fit in and
they don't fit in their campus,
they haven't had enough
attention paid. Did you have any
sense that that was affecting
any of the reasoning of the
justices today in listening to
this case again? JANAI NELSON: I
can't say that it necessarily
affected the justices, but I can
say that Justice Scalia's very
unfortunate and misguided
comment in that (INAUDIBLE)
against African-Americans and
every other minority in terms of
whether they can compete with
others in a highly competitive
higher education setting, what
it reveals is that he doesn't
have faith in the concept of
diversity and what it does for
all students. Also, I think what
was packed in there was a pot
shot, frankly, against our
historically black colleges and
universities that have served
African-Americans at a time when
this country wouldn't and
continue to provide a space for
African-Americans to thrive. I
don't think he realized that he
also really affirmed the notion
that black students, like all
students, need a university
environment in which there are
high expectations are for them,
in which they are welcomed, in
which they are provided
opportunities. And the
University of Texas is seeking
to do that through this very
thoughtful admissions process.
GWEN IFILL: I want to ask you
both, based on what you heard
today and what you have heard in
the past, what do you think the
court is wrestling with at this
stage? I know Justice Kennedy
said at one point he needed more
information. RICHARD KAHLENBERG:
Yes. Well, he said that early on
in the arguments. And then, when
he was pressing Texas to say,
well, what new information could
you provide, I think he pulled
back from that a little bit. I
think what -- we're likely to
have a decision some time this
year. I think we're going to see
a brand-new affirmative action
come out of this. So, instead of
basing our decisions on which,
you know, racial box a student
checks, it will be based on
alternatives that Justice
Kennedy likes, things like
socioeconomic affirmative
action, to give a leg up to
students who are -- you know,
the -- it would give a leg up to
the young Michelle Obama, the
young Sonia Sotomayor, who grew
up in public housing, but not to
Michelle -- to Sasha and Malia.
(CROSSTALK) GWEN IFILL: I would
like you to have a chance to
respond. Go ahead. JANAI NELSON:
Yes. We think that an equal
opportunity for everyone,
regardless of their
socioeconomic background, should
be afforded to them. Clearly, we
care about economic diversity.
And that is certainly one of the
many factors that the University
of Texas considers when
determining how it will compose
its diversity in its entering
freshman class. And there's no
reason to think that we have to
choose race or class. We can
consider the complexity of an
individual in his or her
entirety, their race, their
class, their language, their
parental background, whether
they're from a single-family
household, their geography. All
of those play into creating the
whole person. GWEN IFILL: All
right, we will obviously, as
always, know something by June.
Richard Kahlenberg the Century
Foundation, Janai Nelson of the
NAACP Legal Defense Fund, thank
you both. RICHARD KAHLENBERG:
Thank you. JANAI NELSON: Thank
you. JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with
us. Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Greek police round up migrants
on the border with Macedonia;
plus, the link between stress
and asthma. But, first, in this
presidential race, as with any
of the previous ones over the
past few decades, potential
voters have been inundated with
a seemingly nonstop wave of
opinion polls. But what do polls
really tell us? Historically, at
this point in the race, they
aren't always a good predictor
of the eventual party nominee.
So, how can Americans decipher
which ones are more accurate
than others? In a report that's
part of our collaboration with
"The Atlantic" magazine, we
break down the art and science
of polling. JESSE JACKSON,
Presidential Candidate: Who
would have thought that I would
be in front? JUDY WOODRUFF:
Remember President Jesse
Jackson? President Mario Cuomo?
No? How about President Howard
Dean or Presidents Gingrich,
Cain and Santorum? RICK SANTORUM
(R), Presidential Candidate:
Thank you so much Iowa. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Not ringing any bells?
Of course, none of these men
actually became president. But
each was once deemed a
front-runner in the polls,
however briefly, as he sought
his party's nomination. Early
polls sometimes do reflect the
final numbers. Think Ronald
Reagan in 1980 and Al Gore in
2000. Both led early and became
party nominees. And who knows,
maybe 2016 will be one of those
years, as the Trump juggernaut
shows little sign of slowing.
But, often, the early leader
doesn't hold onto that lead.
BILL MCINTURFF, Partner and
Co-Founder, Public Opinion
Strategies: I don't think Peter
and I, or any pollster, would
tell you that a poll today has
much or any predictive power for
what October of 2016 will look
like. JUDY WOODRUFF: Republican
pollster Bill McInturff partners
with Democratic pollster Peter
Hart to conduct the NBC/Wall
Street Journal poll. PETER HART,
Democratic Pollster: Judy, four
years from now, you're going to
come right at the two of us and
you're going to say, you had Ben
Carson and Donald Trump winning
this election. No, we didn't. We
told you that this is where the
American public is in the odd
year before we're there. JUDY
WOODRUFF: The most reputable
pollsters stand by the accuracy
of their work, but acknowledge
they're wrestling with a sea
change in polling methods. BILL
MCINTURFF: There's no question
it's harder and much more
difficult to collect an accurate
opinion, a sample of opinion of
Americans. I don't think
industry has figured out all of
our methodological problems, and
what we know is, like everything
else, to fix something, it takes
a lot of money. JUDY WOODRUFF:
One problem is cell phones. MAN:
I have a landline at home for
the Internet, and I don't answer
it ever. MAN: My landline isn't
plugged in. I just use a cell
phone. JUDY WOODRUFF: Pollsters
actually do reach out to those
people on cell phones, lots of
them, but it's expensive, far
more expensive than calling a
landline. That's because
pollsters calling landlines can
use auto-dialers, computer
programs that dial random
numbers. But the FCC prohibits
auto-dialers for cell phones, so
every call to a mobile device
must be made by a person. LEE
MIRINGOFF, Director, Marist
Institute for Public Opinion:
This is a state-of-the-art
facility, but all the interviews
are being done manually in terms
of punching in the numbers of
the people we want to reach.
There is no auto-dialing going
on. And we don't even have the
capacity to do that. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Lee Miringoff directs
the Marist Institute for Public
Opinion. LEE MIRINGOFF: Good
scientific, rigorous polls have
become more difficult. They have
become more expensive. And,
unfortunately, we also have seen
a proliferation of lower-quality
polls that also get picked up in
the media. So, for the public as
a whole, it gets a little
confused trying to sort out all
the numbers. BILL MCINTURFF: In
bad polls that I have seen, and
mostly in a partisan setting,
they interview anybody who
answers the phone. Well, guess
who answers the phone now? It's
all people over 50. JUDY
WOODRUFF: So polls that avoid
the expense of calling cell
phones exclude a significant
segment of the population. BILL
MCINTURFF: Forty-five percent of
the people in the country have a
cell phone only, and those
people who are most likely to
have a cell phone, they are
Latinos, some of our America's
poorer respondents, who that's
the one phone they have, and
younger people. So guess what?
If you under-represent in our
politics, Latinos, the poor,
younger people, you are
systematically undercounting
Democrats. JUDY WOODRUFF: What
about online-only polls? PETER
HART: Trouble. I mean, I think
that the work that SurveyMonkey
is doing is exceptionally good.
But I think there are an awful
lot of people who are in this,
and, essentially, unless you
really understand the business
of polling, online polling can
be exceptionally dangerous. BILL
MCINTURFF: But if you're a local
news organization, and someone
says, hey, I can give you a
headline for literally $5,000 or
$7,000 for a poll, compared to
our telling you, wow, that's
just going to be the
interviewing cost for just a
little fraction, that's -- I
mean, we have had an explosion
of that kind of polling. JUDY
WOODRUFF: The major polling
organizations like
ABC/Washington Post, NBC/Wall
Street Journal, Marist, Pew, and
others continue to produce
excellent, accurate polls. But
because of their expense, many
in the industry are working hard
to improve the accuracy of less
costly nontraditional methods
like online polling. Meanwhile,
as the presidential campaign
heats up, and polls proliferate,
the lesson for voters is buyer
beware and to understand that
not all polls are created equal.
At this stage in an election
season, the main targets in the
efforts to reach voters are the
early primary and caucus states,
like Iowa. Here, every four
years, voters are flooded with
phone calls, not just at home,
but wherever they carry a cell
phone. WOMAN: I would we say we
probably get them twice a day,
everyday. WOMAN: Two or three a
day. And do I answer them? No.
TINA SHAW, Voter: Our landline
rings nonstop. JUDY WOODRUFF: I
sat down with these Iowa voters
at Drake University in Des
Moines to hear firsthand what
it's like to be the target of so
many polling calls. TINA SHAW:
It's become somewhat of a game
to figure out who's conducting
the poll. OLIVIA O'HEA, Voter:
Typically, I kind of screen them
and don't answer if I don't
recognize the number. But when I
pick up, I do like to
participate. RAYMOND STARKS,
Voter: I like to kind of
decipher, you know, what is
their agenda, why are they
trying to push this issue,
because that's what you're going
to be seeing in the next two
weeks to a month. J. ANN SELZER,
Selzer & Company, Inc.: The
assignment that Iowans are given
is to look at more candidates
than any other state does, and,
really, embedded in that
assignment is to keep an open
mind. JUDY WOODRUFF: Ann Selzer
runs the Des Moines
Register/Bloomberg poll. She
says polling for caucuses
presents special challenges. J.
ANN SELZER: Finding the people
who are actually going to show
up on caucus night, and getting
a good cross-section of them, is
difficult from the get-go. It
always has been difficult. What
has added to it is that, with
the proliferation of polls,
there's a greater likelihood of
polling burnout. JUDY WOODRUFF:
What is it about polling -- is
there something about polling
that annoys you? DENNIS OLSON,
Voter: I don't like the negative
ones, where they will say, did
you know this person backs -- is
not -- is in favor of abortion?
And then they go into these
things. You can tell right away,
right when it starts. I hang up
on those types of ones. TINA
SHAW: I think when they start
manipulating the questions, it
turns me off. So, it's very
skewed or trying to lead me down
a garden path, I feel like
that's when I click off. J. ANN
SELZER: It is become far more
complicated for the public. And
I feel for the public, because
there are so many polls, and
even I have a hard time weeding
through and finding what
methodology was used. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Determining the source
and purpose of a poll can be
daunting for voters. Public
polls like those conducted by
large media organizations mainly
measure which candidate is up
and which is down, and what
voters think of them. But the
campaigns themselves are also
polling, often in an effort to
change voters' opinions. JEFF
LINK, Link Strategies: We're
really doing a lot of message
development and message testing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jeff Link
directed polling in 25 states
for the 2008 Obama campaign.
JEFF LINK: The horse race
information is not really the
most important thing for a
campaign. It shouldn't be. What
we're really doing with our
polling internally is trying to
figure out, what are the issues
that we need to emphasize the
most, what are the aspects of a
candidate's background that are
most appealing to voters? JUDY
WOODRUFF: And what to say about
an opponent? JEFF LINK: And,
certainly yes, what to say about
an opponent, what people find
most disturbing about an
opponent's record, or what's
something they have said. MATT
STRAWN, Former Chairman, Iowa
Republican Party: Polling ranks
near the top of any decision
when it comes to resource
allocation within a campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt Strawn is a
former chairman of the Iowa
Republican Party. MATT STRAWN:
Where are your weaknesses and
deficiencies? Do you have
weaknesses with female voters in
the eastern part of the state?
You need polling to guide those
decisions. J. ANN SELZER: People
are often asking me, are these
numbers going to hold through
caucus night, and I always
reply, I hope not, and it's hard
to imagine they would. The
campaigns are spending a lot of
time, and money, and effort, and
bringing their candidate into
our state to change those
numbers. So one would hope that
they would. And if they were to
hold, why would we continue to
poll? PETER HART: I think what
you really want to understand is
the mood and the direction of
the electorate. And the fact
that we have Donald Trump ahead,
don't get caught up with that.
Understand the anger behind that
and what that is expressing. J.
ANN SELZER: Imagine how you
would be thinking about this
race -- and let's take the
Republican side -- if you didn't
know what the polls were saying.
You have a field of 15, 16
candidates. How would you know
who is doing well and who is not
doing well if you didn't have a
poll to tell you? Would you
predict Donald Trump? Would you
predict Ben Carson? So I think
those polls are really very
helpful at shaping the debate,
and helping people decide how
they want to vote. JUDY
WOODRUFF: As Iowa voters head
into another caucus season, they
will endure the onset of winter,
as well as the continued barrage
of polling calls, wanted or not.
Being Iowans, they will take it
all in stride, and on a wintry
February night, they will caucus
for their candidate of choice,
bearing out or not what the
polls were showing. GWEN IFILL:
Greek riot police have closed
down a temporary transit camp
used by refugees and migrants on
the border with Macedonia. The
action comes as Balkan
countries, including Macedonia,
have closed their frontiers to
all nationalities except those
from Syria, Iraq and
Afghanistan. That leaves
thousands of so-called economic
migrants hoping to reach
northern Europe stranded in
Greece. From the border, special
correspondent Malcolm Brabant
reports. MALCOLM BRABANT: The
police sealed off the village of
Idomeni at dawn and expelled
news teams from the makeshift
camp, so the operation wouldn't
be conducted under the glare of
publicity. Extra riot police in
full battle gear were brought
in. And there are claims on
social media that excessive
force was used to remove people
from their tents. Hundreds of
migrants were placed on buses
and sent back to Athens and the
northern city of Thessaloniki.
The closure of the camp provoked
strong emotions from Jenny
Ostlund, a volunteer from
Sweden. JENNY OSTLUND,
Volunteer: Driving them back to
Athens without a real options,
like, we don't really know what
they will be forced to do now.
Will they be deported from
Athens? Or -- like, these people
need a viable option right now.
And just moving them from one
place to another will not to
clear up their situation right
now. MALCOLM BRABANT: The Greek
operation represents a
substantial change in policy,
because, for months, they had
helped refugees on their way
north. But the Greeks' hand was
forced by the Balkan countries,
which had decided that they
would only accept refugees from
the conflicts in Iraq, Syria and
Afghanistan. These were the
poignant poster boys of the last
demonstration about the double
anguish of thwarted journeys and
reluctance to retrace steps.
Osman Zihra was an airport
worker in Morocco. Weary of what
he called bad democracy and
insecure employment prospects,
he joined the migrant trail. But
the thousands he spent to get
here so far count for nothing.
OSMAN ZIHRA, Refugee: Europe
needs much more people to work
for them, because European
people aren't going to work like
us. We can work Saturday. We can
work Sunday. We can go after
hours of work. We can work more
hours. But they -- and we can be
cheap for -- you understand me?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Two decades
into Europe's open-border
project, razor wire now
separates some countries in
Central Europe and the Balkans.
The Macedonian government claims
it erected the fence to improve
control of the migrant flow.
This gate was the only entry
point for Syrians, Iraqis and
Afghans. The Macedonians
rejected anyone with suspicious
papers. They protested that they
were one people, but the migrant
trail now has a class system
that is frustrating Tassdaq
Hussain from Pakistan. TASSDAQ
HUSSAIN, Refugee: If we have no
problem there, then why I come
here? We have much problems
there in Pakistan. And,
therefore, we come here. And no
woman wants to leave her family,
her homeland if there is a
suitable job and other things
available in his country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: George
Kosmopoulos from Amnesty
International could offer
nothing but sympathy. GEORGE
KOSMOPOULOS, Amnesty
International: But I don't they
will let you pass for the
moment. I don't know what the
police will do. I'm really sorry
I can't help you. Everyone
substantially has the right to
claim asylum, has the right to
explain their individual
circumstances, and then there
should be a decision whether
these people are refugees or
not. What we actually see here
is just people being divided
according to nationality and
nothing else. And that's
discrimination. It's not fair,
to put it simply, because anyone
can be a refugee. Anyone might
have protection needs. And this
is simply not taken into account
here. MALCOLM BRABANT: Before
the closure, Alexandros
Voulgaris, from the U.N. Refugee
Agency, failed to persuade these
young Somalis to consider
returning to Athens or perhaps
beyond. ALEXANDROS VOULGARIS,
U.N. Refugee Agency: Why are you
still here, when you see and you
know that this is a policy
decision, and the countries have
taken this decision for you?
ABDALLAMOHAMED HALENE, Refugee:
Maybe they will change their
opinion. Always, they believe it
will be changed. ALEXANDROS
VOULGARIS: The door is closed
and they need to start
considering their other options.
MALCOLM BRABANT: And what are
those options? ALEXANDROS
VOULGARIS: For those that have
refugee profiles, the asylum
procedures. And for those that
do not have, there is always
IOM, the International
Organization for Migration,
where they can apply to return
to their countries. MALCOLM
BRABANT: What happened? MAN:
Morocco. MALCOLM BRABANT:
Earlier this week, the
Macedonians supported scores of
economic migrants. Some appeared
to be injured after crossing
mountains from Greece. Human
rights groups have repeatedly
accused the Macedonians of
firing rubber bullets at asylum
seekers. MAN: Thank you, Greece.
Police, Greece, thank you. Thank
you. Thank you. MAN: No
pictures. MALCOLM BRABANT: So
where do the rejected migrants
go now? Giannis Papageorgiou, a
political scientist who
specializes in immigration
policy, believes they will try
alternative groups to get out of
Greece. GIANNIS PAPAGEORGIOU,
Political Scientist: As far as
the risk of refugees or migrants
staying in Greece, yes, it is a
genuine risk. To some extent, I
think that the economic
situation of the country would
deter them from staying long,
because they have nothing to do.
They have -- it is difficult to
survive in Greece, even -- and
they would have to live in some
form of camps, which I don't
think they would. REFUGEES: We
want freedom! We want freedom!
We want freedom! We want
freedom! MALCOLM BRABANT: But
Europe is becoming increasingly
deaf to this appeal. Even the
more hospitable nations like
Germany and Sweden are promising
to deport those who don't merit
political asylum. Idomeni
represents a new European
reality. It's a field of broken
dreams. For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Malcolm Brabant on the
Greek-Macedonian border. JUDY
WOODRUFF: For more than a
decade, the number of Americans
diagnosed with asthma has grown
dramatically, with a nearly 50
percent increase among
African-American children.
Scientists are puzzling over why
some communities are especially
hard-hit and are investigating
links to obesity, bacteria and
chemicals. But new evidence also
points to a mind/body connection
and the role of stress and
trauma. Special correspondent
Indira Lakshmanan has our report
from Michigan. This story was
produced in collaboration with
The Detroit News. WOMAN:
Cameron, get up. It's time to
get up. INDIRA LAKSHMANAN:
Cameron Carter wakes up every
morning with the after-effects
of her cousin's murder. When her
cousin was 12, he was shot to
death by a neighbor at a
birthday party. Soon after,
Cameron ended up in the E.R.
herself, struggling to breathe
from a severe asthma attack.
CAMERON CARTER, Asthma Patient:
When I worry, I start to, like,
get scared and stuff, and when I
get scared, my asthma, it starts
to mess up. INDIRA LAKSHMANAN:
Duncan Smith spent the first
eight months of his life lying
on his back in an Russian
orphanage, often alone, before
being adopted by a middle-class
family in suburban Detroit. His
parents say he sometimes
struggled to breathe as a baby.
Today, he has asthma too. DUNCAN
SMITH, Asthma Patient: Every
time I breathe, I just feel a
little bit of pain, because it's
coming from my lungs and going
up. INDIRA LAKSHMANAN: Malik
Cole's family has been in and
out of temporary housing for a
year, because his father's
income doesn't cover a rent. He
and his four siblings were
sleeping in their car with their
parents when we first met. On
stressful days, his asthma gets
so bad that he vomits or passes
out. MALIK COLE, Asthma Patient:
It feels like I'm hurting. Like
I'm dying. INDIRA LAKSHMANAN:
These children are part of a
growing phenomenon. Nearly one
in 10 children in the U.S. have
asthma today. Doctors have long
understood asthma as an
inflammation of the airways,
triggered by allergens like pets
and pollen, and environmental
irritants like pollution, smoke
and mold. It's also often
hereditary. But across the
country, in places like Detroit,
where childhood asthma has
reached epidemic proportions,
new research shows that stress,
abuse and neighborhood violence
may play as big a role as
physical conditions in causing
kids who never had asthma to
develop the life-threatening
disease. WOMAN: So, we like you,
but we don't want to see you
here. INDIRA LAKSHMANAN: While
some stress is helpful in facing
challenging situations, too much
for too long can trigger the
adrenal glands above the kidneys
to overproduce cortisol and
adrenaline. Those chemicals, in
turn, can kick the immune system
into overdrive and can fuel an
array of health problems,
including, according to new
studies, asthma. KAREN BOUFFARD,
The Detroit News: One in three
Detroit children are living in
extreme poverty. INDIRA
LAKSHMANAN: Karen Bouffard of
The Detroit News says the Motor
City's alarmingly high childhood
asthma rates map closely with
some of the nation's most
violent and impoverished
neighborhoods. KAREN BOUFFARD:
And about a quarter of children
under 6 in Detroit live in
households where there is no
adult working at all. INDIRA
LAKSHMANAN: That must make more
for an incredibly stressful home
life. KAREN BOUFFARD: It does.
There's a whole range of
effects. Parents are worried
coming up with the rent or the
electric bill, the gas money,
and that kind of stress comes
through for children. INDIRA
LAKSHMANAN: The Henry Ford
Health System has opened two
mobile clinics to address
soaring childhood asthma rates,
and has seven school-based
health centers in some of the
city's poorest neighborhoods.
WOMAN: Raise your right hand if
you have ever been told that you
have asthma. INDIRA LAKSHMANAN:
Asthma is the leading chronic
condition causing kids to miss
school in Detroit. Most don't
even have access to inhalers. So
medications are now being
delivered directly to children
at school, with pictures to
remind kids how to use their
inhalers even if there's no
adult to help. WOMAN: What are
you going to do if you want to
be breathing well? STUDENT: Two
puffs every morning. WOMAN: Two
puffs every morning. (CROSSTALK)
STUDENT: And two puffs every
night. INDIRA LAKSHMANAN: But as
Cameron Carter and her mother,
Vickey, know, asthma medication
can't fix everything. The murder
of Cameron's cousin is just one
of the tragedies that has
punctuated her young life.
VICKEY CARTER-IVORY, Mother of
Cameron Carter: We had a house
fire during a birthday party. We
have had family members pass
away. My best friend committed
suicide. A really good friend of
my husband's was murdered. We
had another house fire. We have
had financial difficulties.
INDIRA LAKSHMANAN: Vickey
noticed her daughter's asthma
often spiked in periods of high
stress. And Cameron's attacks
got so bad that her mother
started homeschooling her. The
two joined a National Institutes
of Health-funded study on the
connection among bad
experiences, the stress hormone
cortisol, and asthma. VICKEY
CARTER-IVORY: After the study,
it kind of was a light bulb
moment, where it really made
sense that stress caused asthma
issues. Not all stress -- I
mean, not all asthma issues are
stress-related, but it is a big
issue. INDIRA LAKSHMANAN: A
recent report in a leading
journal on asthma, allergy and
immunology found children
exposed to just one traumatic
experience at home, like
divorce, death of a parent, or
abuse, were 28 percent more
likely to report having asthma
during childhood. Those who
suffered four traumatic events
were 73 percent more likely to
have asthma. DR. ROSALIND
WRIGHT, Kravis Children's
Hospital: You can't ignore it
anymore. The data is there that
says psychological stress is a
factor, just like these other
physical factors. INDIRA
LAKSHMANAN: Dr. Rosalind Wright
is a professor of pediatrics at
Kravis Children's Hospital at
Mount Sinai Health System in New
York. Her latest work shows
stress in itself, irrespective
of poverty or environmental
toxins, can cause asthma.
Emerging research at other
leading institutions is
demonstrating the same cause and
effect. DR. ROSALIND WRIGHT: And
that's important why? Because if
I'm talking to a patient, and
I'm trying to make their asthma
better, or I'm trying to think
about how to prevent asthma from
happening, I want to say, these
are the things we know that can
potentially lead to this, so
these are things we want to try
to help you minimize. WOMAN: So,
when you see the lips or
fingernails turning blue or
gray, that is a 911 situation.
INDIRA LAKSHMANAN: But the
stresses on Malik just keep
adding up. Even though his
mother has sought asthma
education, his condition keeps
getting worse. Sleeping in the
car as the weather turned cold
was making it harder for Malik
to breathe. WOMAN: Because most
asthmatics have difficulty at
night. There's a whole lot of
reasons why that happens. Are
you having difficulty now? Mom,
you have his inhaler? SIRETHA
LATTIMORE, Mother of Malik Cole:
Yes. WOMAN: When I see kids like
this, I know something, because
it's not normal. And it kind of
hurts to breathe like this.
SIRETHA LATTIMORE: Yes, I know
he's stressed out, but he don't
want to tell me. I don't know if
he's scared, he's stressed. I
don't know. INDIRA LAKSHMANAN:
On the day we last saw them,
Malik's parents, with heavy
hearts, drove their four
youngest children to child
protective services to request
the kids be placed in a
temporary foster home until the
parents can find affordable
housing. Their case drives home
the challenge of treating asthma
when life's stresses are so
overwhelming. Getting medication
can be the easy part, compared
with the huge challenge of
healing the underlying trauma.
Programs that attempt to do that
are rare. Duncan Smith's parents
turned to Easter Seals Michigan
and its new trauma intervention
program to help Duncan and his
sister, Gabby (ph), with
emotional and physical
challenges stemming from their
abandonment as babies in Russia.
The children are now undergoing
a series of evaluations. WOMAN:
What helps you breathe? Great
job. INDIRA LAKSHMANAN: And will
be guided to individual and
group counseling to help them
better cope with stress and
anxiety. A year of counseling
helped Cameron Carter and her
brothers, who were standing on
either side of their cousin when
he was killed. CAMERON CARTER: I
learned that you should forgive
yourself before you start
blaming yourself for stuff, that
it wasn't your fault. INDIRA
LAKSHMANAN: Her brother,
Alexander, who has gotten his
asthma under control, is now a
starting running back on the
school's varsity football team.
Cameron, who takes weekly dance
classes, still struggles. But,
as she learns to cope with her
anxieties, she's starting to
better manage her asthma, one
breath at a time. For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Indira Lakshmanan
in Detroit. JUDY WOODRUFF: On
our Web site, you can learn how
stress-fueled health conditions
like asthma may actually be
passed from one generation to
another, and find a link to the
full report from The Detroit
News, which includes more on the
research and on each of the
families profiled in our story.
That's on our home page. GWEN
IFILL: On the "NewsHour" online
right now: A popular art form
that once reinforced stereotypes
about Native Americans is now
telling a different story. Rocky
Mountain PBS explores how a new
wave of comic books offers fresh
takes on Native identity. All
that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour. JUDY
WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight. On
Thursday, we will look at how a
Vermont ski resort cashed in on
a little known visa program. I'm
Judy Woodruff. GWEN IFILL: And
I'm Gwen Ifill. Join us online
and again here tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.